I like to be really open and honest and
share my life with you guys and I felt
like this was a dramatic life change
that I needed to make a video about and
the whole professional hockey player
thing didn't really seem like something
that was gonna happen so as I got older
I was starting to realize okay probably
not gonna make any real money playing
professional sports so I just wanted to
sit down and make a whole video on my
experience with education and why I
dropped out of school and didn't go to
university and why I don't plan to go to
university and that's when I realized a
nine-to-five kind of job just really
isn't for me I hate doing things on
other people's terms I hate just having
to get up in the morning and do things
at a certain time in a certain way so I
was thinking okay if I'm gonna go to
university for something
[Music]
I can't believe I've been sitting so
long fooling with the clouds that's done
these days before see I met this girl
and she was so fun I've been thinking
about this and meditating and praying
about it for a while and like I said
whenever I pushed it off I would be okay
and everything would be fine as long as
I wasn't thinking about like what am I
gonna do with my life
am I really happy but every time like at
the end of my yoga practice or we're not
just really thinking about it and trying
to listen to myself all these emotions
would come up and I would feel like I
just wasn't really following the right
path
[Music]
the warning I'm about to share with you
applies to both YouTube and Western
academia it applies to both although it
applies to them in different ways
no matter what career path you're
looking on it's dangerous and misleading
to only consider success stories don't
look at the greatest luminaries don't
look at the most successful people in
the field and think oh if I go into that
field I can be like them give a moment's
thought to the range of mediocre
outcomes that are possible really think
through the worst case scenario not just
the best case scenario and needless to
say it's not just the case that here on
YouTube for every one person who's as
successful as tests beg or Caitlin
shoemaker there's a surrounding halo
should we say that there's a surrounding
crater of thousands on thousands of
people who tried very hard and never
about the outcome and never got the
success even more invisibly if you go to
university and you take a look at the
most successful professors academics
researchers the most successful
graduates from that program the
University you may be able to find a few
examples of successful luminaries but
then there are thousands there's a huge
crater there's a huge surrounding halo
of failure that's much much harder to
see it's much harder
to find a trace of its it's a strange
fact that about one year ago my mother
was really positive about the idea that
I would drop out of university
my second university degree I already
have a bachelor's degree whatever that I
would drop out of university and just do
youtube full-time she has a lifetime of
experience with university and when she
looks at my youtube channel when she
looks at the fact that I can upload a
video talking about Aristotle like
politics and history and ancient Greece
I can upload a video about Aristotle and
500 people watch that video within just
a few days she's sensitive the fact that
that is not a small number compared to
friends and colleagues and friends of
hers who may have worked very very hard
their whole lives to get academic
credentials and present papers at
conferences and publish a book and the
book is never read by 500 people in many
cases the book will not even sell 200
copies I used to work in academic
nonfiction in a publishing house as an
editor I've seen that story from many
different sides and angles from the side
of the author from the start of the
publisher from start of the industry
from the side of the audience to some
extent to oh so you know it wasn't
completely ridiculous that my mother
would have this attitude that what I
should do is develop myself as an author
and creative artist building on what had
already started here on YouTube it's not
completely ridiculous but it's wrong
something I said to my mother something
I said to one of our professors
University of Victoria - is that a
similar conversation with one of my
professors one of my professors who was
encouraging me to drop out of the
program even though I have grades that
are eight plus plus use the example of
dr. Jordan Peterson why is dr. Peterson
successful on YouTube because before he
was successful on YouTube he appeared in
a long series of appear
on mainstream television first he
appeared on TV Ontario and then he
appeared on CBC the Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation okay so his
YouTube success was a result of
conventional television success why did
he appear on conventional television
because he has a PhD why did a book
publisher offer to gather together his
casual Q&A commentary from websites he
did some Q&A and publish it as a book
why did he get a book publishing deal
because he had a PhD because he was a
professor so even with these bizarre
examples of people being successful as
public intellectuals here on YouTube
look you can want to look at you know
dr. jordan peterson or any of the other
you know peculiar characters who've done
that the role of formal education and
getting a formal credential it's it's
not that it helps them it's just that
it's a requirement all right
there's a difference between studying in
university and actually being useful for
you in some way and the diploma the
degree that credential simply being a
requirement for doing what you want to
do now my mother has seen you know
failures in academia and around academia
of many constants I've seen it too I've
seen people with PhDs whose lives have
really been utterly destroyed by those
PhDs
I've seen people with PhDs who after
they finished their degree were left
lurking in the hallways of Cambridge
University struggling to pay rent
somewhere within a bus ride distance of
the university and you know they'd
finish their studies they're still
hanging around they're applying for
internships they're applying for
fellowships they're applying for
research opportunities that pay next to
nothing they don't know what to do with
their lives of course back when I was at
the publisher I had all these people
with PhDs trying to publish books with
us
hoping for some way to take a step
forward in their lives and I met those
people with PhDs who were living in
Beijing China as humble English teachers
who were living in Bangkok Thailand who
were living in vientiane laos people
with PhDs who were doing jobs that you
could have done right after completing
high school i remember one guy who got a
job as a selling bottles of wine
standing there doing retail remember
another guy got a job as a line cook
with his with his PhD in anthropology
great i've seen people you know across
its kind of this tremendous range of
shades of gray of you know living in a
state of self-hating depression and
devastation that they got their PhD and
then were not able to do with it
anything that wanted to do many times
there's also a regret and a resentment
that they got this education but they
never learned what it is they wanted to
learn in the same way that for everyone
youtube channel as successful as test
bag
there are thousands and thousands and
thousands of young women who you know
wear the same revealing attire and jump
up and down and bounce around and put
their recipes on the internet and who
are never gonna make you know 500 bucks
out of out of doing this okay but of
course the mistake test bag made was to
drop out of high school to do this
full-time whether we're talking about
university education or talking about
youtube or talking about the strange way
in which the two sometimes overlapped
someone like jordan peterson who used
his PhD to manage to himself social
media fame bizarre bizarre but true and
who knows
there was talk just a couple of years
ago people were talking about him
running for prime minister of canada he
may go on to have a political career now
if he ever gets out of drug addiction
rehab and gets over his health problems
but you know uh stranger things have
happened in the history of canada i here
right now in america you
elected a reality TV star reality TV
game show host as oppose became
president the United States of America
so a youtuber could definitely become
Prime Minister of Canada there's no
there's still talk about that however
the ultimate question you have to ask
yourself is about the one outcome that
matters most the one outcome you can
control okay you don't get to decide
whether your career is going to be
successful or unsuccessful what you get
to decide is what kind of person you
want to be all right dropping out of
high school changes who you are
completing a bachelor's degree in
political science leads to no employment
of any kind whatsoever right you don't
get to choose that every day when I went
to University of Victoria and asked for
help from a guidance counsellor from the
careers office or from the professor
who's head of department the only advice
that ever gave me was join the army join
the CIA do military intelligence it was
the only job they ever recommended for
me on the basis of my having a
university degree in politics and
another one in Asian Studies Asian
language all right ultimately you have
to look at these decisions whether about
education or entertainment in terms of
being the person you want to be becoming
the person you want to become and to
that end for that purpose you can't rely
on anyone else you have to regard your
enrollment at the University as
absolutely nothing but a library card
space on your desk and space on the
calendar to do the research to do the
work on to your own motivation under
your own guidance that's gonna let you
become the person you aspire to be you
can plan your life around possible
outcomes but there's one outcome that's
inevitable you've got to be somebody
now choose who is it who is it you
really want to be I mean really people
like to disrespect my truth but the fact
is that you know my name is I don't know